# Defender

**Defender** is a defensive-programming toolkit with all sorts of goodies. Because of the breadth it provides, this article is broken up into sections for each.

## Checks

Checks are helper functions for efficiently doing boolean expressions that can be problematic. Whether the way to do them isn't obvious, or there's a more efficient way than most people are doing them, if there's a check defined for what you're doing, you probably want to use it.

## Exceptions

**Defender** defines a _lot_ of exceptions. Look, we're all developers, we all have run into some god awful error messages. It _sucks_. The point here is to provide a very rich exception hierarchy allowing for handlers to be broad, but reporting to be detailed. Furthermore, because the exceptions get so specific, it means error messages can start to be generated by the framework. In many cases exception types provide some static variant of a `With()` function that takes the relevant parameters and generates the message for you. What was `throw new ArgumentException("hopefully someone fills this out in a detailed way", nameof(argument));` can now be `throw ExampleException.With(...relevant parameters);` You get a well defined and consistent error message for you!

## Guards

Guards are what **Defender** was originally designed for, although I've been gravitating away from it over time. It still has its uses however. Rather than manually writing out guard clauses, these are prepackaged checks + exceptions than you can write in one line. So why am I getting away from this? When possible it's best to gracefully handle situations, not throw exceptions willy-nilly. But if exceptions truly are what you need, this will greatly reduce the amount of typing you need to do.

## Patterns

Code/Design patterns are everywhere. You use them all the time. Wouldn't it be nice to get some help implementing them?
