# Collectathon

**Collectathon** was one of the next things to show up. **Stringier** had a growing need for unique data structures and I was growing disatisfied with existing solutions out there. What I needed wasn't just solid data structures; I needed a way to rapidly create new data structures without duplicating large amounts of code. **Collectathon** was, first and foremost, a data structure framework. _Was_, because now it's just the proper collections. The framework part split off into **Philosoft** when I realized it was useful to more than just collections, if some additions were made. Things were clear again: a side project meant to support another has, itself, turned into a key project.

One of the key design principals of **Collectathon** has always been that the types should be data structures, not abstract data types. Say you need a stack. Anything that provides stack traits can act as a stack. This could mean an array or a linked list. You chose the performanxe characteristics _you_ need, and the design lets you easily switch data structures as those needs change.

Also provided are some extension libraries to support some of these abstract data types. If you're working with stacks, for example, there's a set of extensions you can include that enhance data structures with stack traits for certain types. A major example is stacks of numeric types will have additional operations for stack math. Queues of delegates also have support for dequeuing and invoking as one simple operation. They're simple conveniences, but it makes your overall experience more enjoyable.