# Stringier

**Stringier** is where this whole thing got started. I was working on a suite of Ada tooling that's now deprecated, and was frustrated with the need to keep writing out common text functions. I knew I wasn't the only one, so I spawned a little side project to help. Originally it was just some simple extensions but it grew into one of the largest and most sophisticated text processing libraries there is. It seemed like this was the perfect place to implement a novel text parser design as well, and when this performed absurdly well it became clear the project, and its name, were here to stay.

Things grew massively from there. **Stringier** started to include efficient implementations of text manipulation functions for things often used but never provided by standard libraries. It would go on to include implementations of text search algorithms, and even edit distance algorithms. These are usable on their own, allowing you, the developer, to chose what performance characteristics a search should have, or what requirements make up an edit. But they're also used throughout the project, including things like the patterns framework, to support things like fuzzy parsing, a rarely provided feature that's useful in numerous scenarios, including genomic parsing. As the many text processing functions grew, it became clear there was a need for better character classification than .NET could provide, so a special category type was created, allowing for more granular categorization, and even composing categories as simple expressions!